Add documentation for deploying packaged Kedro projects on Databricks (#2595)
kedro-org/kedro: docs/source/integrations/databricks_deployment_workflow.md

# Databricks deployment workflow

> In this guide, you will explore the process of packaging a Kedro project and running it as a job on Databricks. Databricks jobs are a way to execute code on Databricks clusters, allowing you to run data processing tasks, ETL jobs, or machine learning workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Databricks jobs are a way to execute code on Databricks clusters, allowing you to run data processing tasks, ETL jobs, or machine learning workflows. In this guide we explore the process of packaging a Kedro project and running it as a job on Databricks. 
```

> 

Reviewer: Please can you add a heading "What are the advantages of packaging a Kedro project to run on Databricks?" It's useful for search, for adding as an FAQ and generally for the reader.

Author: I've added this heading.

By packaging your Kedro project and running it on Databricks, you can execute your pipeline without the need for a notebook. This approach is particularly well-suited for production, as it provides a structured and reproducible way to run your code. However, it is not ideal for development, where rapid iteration is necessary. For guidance on developing a Kedro project for Databricks in a rapid build-test loop, see the [development workflow guide](./databricks_development_workflow.md).

> Running your packaged project as a Databricks job is very different to running it from a notebook. In particular, it does not **not** allow you to see the log output of your project as you may be used to seeing it when running Kedro from a command line or notebook. Here are some example use cases for running a packaged Kedro project as a Databricks job:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running your packaged project as a Databricks job is very different to running it from a notebook. In particular, it does not **not** allow you to see the log output of your project as you may be used to seeing it when running Kedro from a command line or notebook. 

Here are some typical use cases for running a packaged Kedro project as a Databricks job:
```

- **Data engineering pipeline**: the output of your Kedro project is a file or set of files containing cleaned and processed data.
- **Machine learning with MLflow**: your Kedro project runs an ML model and metrics about your experiments are tracked in MLflow.
- **Automated and scheduled runs**: your Kedro project should be run on Databricks on an [automated schedule](https://docs.databricks.com/workflows/jobs/schedule-jobs.html#add-a-job-schedule).
- **CI/CD integration**: you have a CI/CD pipeline set up that produces a packaged Kedro project.

> By the end of this guide, you'll have a clear understanding of the steps involved in packaging your Kedro project and running it as a job on Databricks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## What this page covers

> - [Set up your Kedro project for deployment on Databricks.](#set-up-your-project-for-deployment-to-databricks)

Reviewer: Nice! Thanks for adding the anchors! ⭐

```

### Install Kedro and the databricks CLI in a new virtual environment

The following commands will create a new Conda environment, activate it, and then install Kedro and the Databricks CLI.

In your local development environment, create a virtual environment for this tutorial using Conda:

```bash
conda create --name iris-databricks python=3.10
```

Once it is created, activate it:

```bash
conda activate iris-databricks
```

With your Conda environment activated, install Kedro and the Databricks CLI:

```bash
pip install kedro databricks-cli --upgrade
```

### Authenticate the Databricks CLI

**Now, you must authenticate the Databricks CLI with your Databricks instance.**

[Refer to the Databricks documentation](https://docs.databricks.com/dev-tools/cli/index.html#set-up-authentication) for a complete guide on how to authenticate your CLI. The key steps are:

1. Create a personal access token for your user on your Databricks instance.
2. Run `databricks configure --token`.
3. Enter your token and Databricks host when prompted.
4. Run `databricks fs ls dbfs:/` at the command line to verify your authentication.

### Create a new Kedro project

> Create a Kedro project with the PySpark Iris starter using the following command in your local environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Kedro project by using the following command in your local environment:
```

```bash
kedro new --starter=pyspark-iris
```

> Name your new project `iris-databricks` for consistency with the rest of this guide. This command creates a new Kedro project using the PySpark Iris starter template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command creates a new Kedro project using the PySpark Iris starter template. Name your new project `iris-databricks` for consistency with the rest of this guide.
```

### Create an entry point for Databricks

> The default entry point of a Kedro project uses a Click command line interface (CLI), which is not compatible with Databricks. To run your project as a Databricks job, you must define a new entry point speficially for use on Databricks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default entry point of a Kedro project uses a Click command line interface (CLI), which is not compatible with Databricks. To run your project as a Databricks job, you must define a new entry point specifically for use on Databricks.
```

> The PySpark Iris starter has this entry point pre-built, so there is no extra work to do in this guide. **Generally you must create it manually for your own projects using the following steps**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PySpark Iris starter has this entry point pre-built, so there is no extra work to do here, but generally you must **create an entry point manually for your own projects using the following steps**:
```

    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    parser.add_argument("--env", dest="env", type=str)
    parser.add_argument("--conf-source", dest="conf_source", type=str)
    parser.add_argument("--package-name", dest="package_name", type=str)

    args = parser.parse_args()
    env = args.env
    conf_source = args.conf_source
    package_name = args.package_name

    # https://kb.databricks.com/notebooks/cmd-c-on-object-id-p0.html
    logging.getLogger("py4j.java_gateway").setLevel(logging.ERROR)
    logging.getLogger("py4j.py4j.clientserver").setLevel(logging.ERROR)

    configure_project(package_name)
    with KedroSession.create(env=env, conf_source=conf_source) as session:
        session.run()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

2. **Define a new entry point**: Open `<project_root>/src/setup.py` in a text editor or IDE and add a new line in the definition of the `entry_point` tuple, so that it becomes:

```python
entry_point = (..., "databricks_run = <package_name>.databricks_run:main")
```

Remember to replace <package_name> with the correct package name for your project.

This process adds an entry point to your project which can be used to run it on Databricks.

> ```{note}

Reviewer: I need to check if the bullet formatting you've added here in the note will work when built by Sphinx...

In this guide, your project will save its logs to a location in DBFS.

- **Create a directory to save your logs into on DBFS**: at the command line in your local environment, run the following Databricks CLI command:

```bash
databricks fs mkdirs dbfs:/FileStore/iris-databricks/logs
```

This command creates a directory on DBFS (`/dbfs/FileStore/iris-databricks/logs`) where your project can save its logs.

**The `databricks` environment of the PySpark Iris starter is already configured to save logs in this location.** The configuration used to achieve this is part of the [`databricks` environment](../configuration/configuration_basics.md#configuration-environments) defined for PySpark Iris and can be found in the `conf/databricks/logging.yml` file.

### Package your project

To package your Kedro project for deployment on Databricks, you must create a Wheel (`.whl`) file, which is a binary distribution of your project. In the root directory of your Kedro projec   t, run the following command:

```bash
kedro package
```

This command generates a `.whl` file in the `dist` directory within your project's root directory.

### Upload project data and configuration to DBFS

> Your packaged Kedro project needs access to data and configuration in order to run. Therefore, you will need to upload your project's data and configuration to an accessible location. In this guide, we will store the data on the Databricks File System (DBFS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your packaged Kedro project needs access to data and configuration in order to run. Therefore, you will need to upload your project's data and configuration to a location accessible to Databricks. In this guide, we will store the data on the Databricks File System (DBFS).
```

Reviewer: Are there other options besides DBFS? Might be worth listing them (and pointing to links to find out more?) if so.

Author: Hmm, I like this idea, but I feel a problem in this case is that there are so many possible ways to store config and data in an internet-accessible location and these have so many caveats. If I start an explanation here there's no way to quickly finish it without leaving the user with more questions and showing them a red herring. I would prefer to focus the user's attention on Databricks in this guide, as this is already a lot to take in at once.

If you'd like I can change the wording here to make it less suggestive that there are other ways of achieving this.

The PySpark Iris starter contains an environment that is set up to access data stored in DBFS (`conf/databricks`). To learn more about environments in Kedro configuration, see the [configuration documentation](../configuration/configuration_basics.md#configuration-environments). When you run your project on Databricks, you will pass the name of this environment as an option, as well as the path to the `conf/` directory on DBFS.

> There are several ways to upload data to DBFS. In this guide, it is recommended to use [Databricks CLI](https://docs.databricks.com/dev-tools/cli/dbfs-cli.html) because of the convenience it offers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several ways to upload data to DBFS but we recommend that [Databricks CLI](https://docs.databricks.com/dev-tools/cli/dbfs-cli.html) because of the convenience it offers.
```

Reviewer: Again, you could list the other options of the "several ways" you mention.

Author: I've mentioned two other ways, plus links. There are one or two more I could think of, but I think it would be too confusing to add them.

- **Upload your project's data and config**: at the command line in your local environment, use the following Databricks CLI commands to upload your project's locally stored data and configuration to DBFS:

```bash
databricks fs cp --recursive <project_root>/data/ dbfs:/FileStore/iris-databricks/data
databricks fs cp --recursive <project_root>/conf/ dbfs:/FileStore/iris-databricks/conf
```

The `--recursive` flag ensures that the entire folder and its contents are uploaded. You can list the contents of the destination folder in DBFS using the following command:

```bash
databricks fs ls dbfs:/FileStore/iris-databricks/data
```

You should see the contents of the project's `data/` directory printed to your terminal:

```bash
01_raw
02_intermediate
03_primary
04_feature
05_model_input
06_models
07_model_output
08_reporting
```

> ```{note}

Reviewer: I'd be tempted to push this up to the top of the section to explain why we have to follow it.

A Kedro project's configuration and data do not get included when it is packaged. They must be stored somewhere accessible to allow your packaged project to run.
```

## Deploy and run your Kedro project using the workspace UI

> To run your packaged project on Databricks, login to your Databricks account and, perform the following steps in the workspace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run your packaged project on Databricks, login to your Databricks account and perform the following steps in the workspace:
```

- In the `Parameters` field, enter the following list of runtime options:

```bash
["--conf-source", "/dbfs/FileStore/iris-databricks/conf", "--env", "databricks", "--package-name", "iris_databricks"]
```

The final configuration for your job should look the same as the following:

![Configure Databricks job](../meta/images/databricks_configure_new_job.png)

Click `Create` and then `Confirm and create` in the following pop-up asking you to name the job.

4. **Run the job**: Click `Run now` in the top-right corner of your new job's page to start a run of the job. The status of your run can be viewed in the `Runs` tab of your job's page. Navigate to the `Runs` tab and track the progress of your run:

![Databricks job status](../meta/images/databricks_job_status.png)

This page also shows an overview of all past runs of your job. As you only just started your job run, it's status will be `Pending`. A status of `Pending` indicates that the cluster is being started and your code is waiting to run.

The following things happen when you run your job:

> - The job cluster will be provisioned and started (job status: `Pending`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The job cluster is provisioned and started (job status: `Pending`).
```

> - The packaged Kedro project and all its dependencies will be installed (job status: `Pending`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The packaged Kedro project and all its dependencies are installed (job status: `Pending`)
```

> - The packaged Kedro project will be run from the specified `databricks_run` entry point (job status: `In Progress`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The packaged Kedro project is run from the specified `databricks_run` entry point (job status: `In Progress`).
```

> - The packaged code will finish executing and the job cluster will be stopped (job status: `Succeeded`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The packaged code finishes executing and the job cluster is stopped (job status: `Succeeded`).
```

A run will take roughly six to seven minutes.

> When the status of your run is `Succeeded`, your job has successfully finished executing. You can now proceed to view the logs that your project produced while it was running. To retrieve the logs file from the [location in DBFS where it was saved](#plan-your-projects-output), use the following `databricks CLI` command at your local command line with the `iris-databrick` conda environment activated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the status of your run is `Succeeded`, your job has successfully finished executing. You can now view the logs that your project produced while it was running. To retrieve the log file from the [location in DBFS where it was saved](#plan-your-projects-output), use the following `databricks CLI` command at your local command line with the `iris-databrick` conda environment activated:
```

```bash
databricks fs cp dbfs:/FileStore/iris-databricks/logs/info.log .
```

This will download the logs file from DBFS to your local environment. You can view the contents of the `info.log` file in any text editor, they will look similar to the following:

```bash
...
2023-05-19 14:38:06,333 - kedro.io.data_catalog - INFO - Loading data from 'example_iris_data' (SparkDataSet)...
2023-05-19 14:38:12,077 - kedro.io.data_catalog - INFO - Loading data from 'parameters' (MemoryDataSet)...
2023-05-19 14:38:12,079 - kedro.pipeline.node - INFO - Running node: split: split_data([example_iris_data,parameters]) -> [X_train@pyspark,X_test@pyspark,y_train@pyspark,y_test@pyspark]
...
```

By following these steps, you packaged your Kedro project and manually ran it as a job on Databricks using the workspace UI.

## Resources for automating deployment to Databricks

> This page describes a manual workflow for deploying and running project on Databricks. This process can be automated in two ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Up to this point, this page has described a manual workflow for deploying and running a project on Databricks. The process can be automated in two ways:
```

- [Use the Databricks API.](#databricks-api)
- [Use the Databricks CLI.](#databricks-cli)

Both of these methods enable you to store information about your job declaratively in the same version control system as the rest of your project. For each method, the information stored declaratively is the same as what is entered manually in the [above section on creating and running a job in Databricks](#deploy-and-run-your-kedro-project-using-the-workspace-ui).

These methods can be integrated into a CI/CD pipeline to automatically deploy a packaged Kedro project to Databricks as a job.

> ### Databricks API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How to use the Databricks API to automate deployment of a Kedro project
```
